Blogpost: Managing connector offsets (#452)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2024-09-26-managing-connector-offsets.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Managing Connector Offsets"
date: 2024-08-26
author: kate_stanley
---

When building data pipelines using Kafka Connect, or replicating data using MirrorMaker, offsets are used to keep track of the flow of data.
Sink connectors use the usual Kafka consumer offset mechanism, while source connectors can store offsets with a custom format in a Kafka topic.

To manage connector offsets, rather than directly interacting with the underlying Kafka topics, you can make use of the following endpoints from the Connect REST API:

* `GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to list offsets
* `PATCH /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to alter offsets
* `DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to reset offsets

> In the next release of Strimzi you will also be able to manage connector offsets directly in the KafkaConnector and KafkaMirrorMaker2 custom resources.

Reviewer: Maybe? 
```suggestion
In the next release of Strimzi (i.e., 0.44.x) you will also be able to manage connector offsets directly in the KafkaConnector and KafkaMirrorMaker2 custom resources.
```

Author: I've updated the wording to similar to what you suggested

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
# ...
spec:
  #...
  state: stopped
  alterOffsets:
    fromConfigMap:
      name: my-connector-offsets
  #...
```

The `status` in the `KafkaConnector` is updated once Strimzi has stopped the connector.

Now edit the `my-connector-offsets` ConfigMap to change the `position` to, for example, 10:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
# ...
data:
  offsets.json: |-
    {
      "offsets" : [ {
        "partition" : {
          "filename" : "/opt/kafka/LICENSE"
        },
        "offset" : {
          "position" : 10
        }
      } ]
    }
```

Finally trigger the operator to alter offsets by annotating the resource:

```shell
$ kubectl annotate kafkaconnector my-source-connector strimzi.io/connector-offsets=alter -n kafka
```

Strimzi removes the `strimzi.io/connector-offsets` annotation from the resource once the offsets have been successfully updated.
You can also verify this directly:

```shell
$ kubectl exec -n kafka -it my-connect-cluster-connect-0 -- curl localhost:8083/connectors/my-source-connector/offsets
{"offsets":[{"partition":{"filename":"/opt/kafka/LICENSE"},"offset":{"position":10}}]}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would make sense to add a chapter here that user will need to _unstopp_ the connector again by editing the CR again as it might not be obvious that it doesn't happen automatically.

### Resetting offsets

The final action you can perform is to reset the connector offsets.
For this action the connector also needs to be in a `stopped` state, but you don't need any ConfigMap.

Reset the offsets for your connector by annotating the resource:

```shell
$ kubectl annotate kafkaconnector my-source-connector strimzi.io/connector-offsets=reset -n kafka
```

> Once complete the connector offsets will be empty:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once completed, the connector offsets will be empty:
```

```shell
$ kubectl exec -n kafka -it my-connect-cluster-connect-0 -- curl localhost:8083/connectors/my-source-connector/offsets
{"offsets":[]}
```

> ### Managing offsets for MirrorMaker

Reviewer 2: I think mentioning the stopping of the connector here as well and possibly an example YAML how to do it might be helpful as well.

In addition to connectors managed via the `KafkaConnector` resource, you can also manage the connectors that are deployed as part of a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource.

> When using a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource the configurations for the ConfigMaps for listing and altering offsets are provided on a per-connector basis. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource, the configurations for the ConfigMaps for listing and altering offsets are specified on a per-connector basis. For example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaMirrorMaker2
metadata:
  name: my-mirror-maker-2
spec:
  # ...
  mirrors:
  - # ...
    sourceConnector:
      listOffsets:
        toConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
      alterOffsets:
        fromConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
    # ...
```

> Strimzi allows you to list, alter and reset offsets for all the MirrorMaker connectors (MirrorSourceConnector, MirrorCheckpointConnector, MirrorHeartbeatConnector).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strimzi allows you to list, alter, and reset offsets for all the MirrorMaker connectors (`MirrorSourceConnector`, `MirrorCheckpointConnector`, `MirrorHeartbeatConnector`).
```

> However, be aware that the only connector that currently actively uses its offsets is the MirrorSourceConnector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, be aware that the only connector that currently actively uses its offsets is the `MirrorSourceConnector`.
```

> You may find listing offsets useful for the MirrorCheckpointConnector and MirrorHeartbeatConnector to track progress, but it is uncommon to need to alter or reset offsets for those connectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Listing offsets can be useful for the `MirrorCheckpointConnector` and `MirrorHeartbeatConnector` to track progress. However, altering or resetting offsets for these connectors is rarely necessary.
```

> Strimzi only allows you to perform an action on a single connector, in a single mirror at a time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strimzi only allows you to perform actions on one connector within a single mirror at a time.
```

Therefore, to initiate an action from a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource you must apply two annotations:
* strimzi.io/connector-offsets
* strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector

Set `strimzi.io/connector-offsets` to one of `list`, `alter` or `reset`.
At the same time set `strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector` to the name of your connector.

Strimzi names the connectors using the format `<SOURCE_ALIAS>-><TARGET_ALIAS>.<CONNECTOR_TYPE>`, for example `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`.

You can use a single command to annotate the resource with both annotations.

> For example to list offsets for a connector called `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, this command lists offsets for a connector called `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`:
```

```shell
$ kubectl annotate kafkaconnector my-source-connector strimzi.io/connector-offsets=list strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector="east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector" -n kafka
```

When listing and altering offsets for MirrorMaker connectors, Strimzi uses the connector name in the data field.
For example, the above command to list offsets for the connector `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector` results in a ConfigMap containing:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
# ...
data:
  east-kafka--west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector.json: |
    {
      "offsets": [
        {
          "partition": {
            "cluster": "east-kafka",
            "partition": 0,
            "topic": "mirrormaker2-cluster-configs"
          },
          "offset": {
            "offset": 0
          }
        }
      ]
    }
```

### Conclusion

> Now you can list, alter and reset offsets of your connectors using the `KafkaConnector` and `KafkaMirrorMaker2` custom resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you can list, alter, and reset offsets of your connectors using the `KafkaConnector` and `KafkaMirrorMaker2` custom resources.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Managing Connector Offsets"
date: 2024-08-26
author: kate_stanley
---

When building data pipelines using Kafka Connect, or replicating data using MirrorMaker, offsets are used to keep track of the flow of data.
Sink connectors use Kafka's standard consumer offset mechanism, while source connectors store offsets in a custom format within a Kafka topic.

> To manage connector offsets, rather than directly interacting with the underlying Kafka topics, you can make use of the following endpoints from the Connect REST API:

Reviewer 4: Should we say `you should` instead of `you can`?

> To manage connector offsets, rather than directly interacting with the underlying Kafka topics, you can make use of the following endpoints from the Connect REST API:

Reviewer 4: Should we briefly mention common use cases for listing, altering, resetting offsets? Such as skipping a poison pill, replaying records, or specifying a specific offset to start mirroring.

* `GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to list offsets
* `PATCH /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to alter offsets
* `DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets` to reset offsets

From Strimzi 0.44 onwards you can also manage connector offsets directly in the `KafkaConnector` and `KafkaMirrorMaker2` custom resources.
This blog post steps through how you can use this new functionality.

> The process is very similar for both Kafka Connect and MirrorMaker, so we'll demonstrate how to do it with KafkaConnect and then explain how the process applies to MirrorMaker.

Reviewer 4: Should it be `Kafka Connect` (with a space)?

In addition to connectors managed via the `KafkaConnector` resource, you can also manage the connectors that are deployed as part of a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource.
When using a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource, the configurations for the ConfigMaps for listing and altering offsets, as well as the `state` configuration for stopping and resuming the connector, are specified on a per-connector basis. For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaMirrorMaker2
metadata:
  name: my-mirror-maker-2
spec:
  # ...
  mirrors:
  - # ...
    sourceConnector:
      listOffsets:
        toConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
      alterOffsets:
        fromConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
      state: stopped
    # ...
```

Strimzi allows you to list, alter and reset offsets for all the MirrorMaker connectors (`MirrorSourceConnector`, `MirrorCheckpointConnector`, `MirrorHeartbeatConnector`).
However, be aware that the only connector that currently actively uses its offsets is the `MirrorSourceConnector`.
Listing offsets can be useful for the `MirrorCheckpointConnector` and `MirrorHeartbeatConnector` to track progress.

> However, altering or resetting offsets for these connectors is rarely necessary.

Reviewer 4: Currently this is never necessary as this has no functional impact.

Author: My understanding from the discussion on the PR to Kafka is that it's possible people might want to do this for cleanup purposes, so that's why I went with "rarely necessary". Given that Kafka does let you do it rather than throwing an exception (which they did discuss doing) I think it's fair for us to describe it this way.

Therefore, to initiate an action from a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource you must apply two annotations:
* `strimzi.io/connector-offsets`
* `strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector`

Set `strimzi.io/connector-offsets` to one of `list`, `alter` or `reset`.
At the same time set `strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector` to the name of your connector.

Strimzi names the connectors using the format `<SOURCE_ALIAS>-><TARGET_ALIAS>.<CONNECTOR_TYPE>`, for example `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`.

You can use a single command to annotate the resource with both annotations.
For example, this command lists offsets for a connector called `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`:

```shell
$ kubectl annotate kafkaconnector my-source-connector strimzi.io/connector-offsets=list strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector="east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector" -n kafka
```

When listing and altering offsets for MirrorMaker connectors, Strimzi uses the connector name in the data field.
For example, the above command to list offsets for the connector `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector` results in a ConfigMap containing:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
# ...
data:

>   east-kafka--west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector.json: |

Reviewer 4: Should we mention that the `>` character is replaced by `-` in the field name?

    {
      "offsets": [
        {
          "partition": {
            "cluster": "east-kafka",
            "partition": 0,
            "topic": "mirrormaker2-cluster-configs"
          },
          "offset": {
            "offset": 0
          }
        }
      ]
    }
```

### Conclusion

> Now you can list, alter, and reset offsets of your connectors using the `KafkaConnector` and `KafkaMirrorMaker2` custom resources.

Reviewer 4: That's a very short conclusion. Maybe we can say the use cases mentioned in the intro (if you follow my other suggestion above) are now easily done?

Author: Does the new conclusion work better?

This blog post steps through how you can use this new functionality.
The process is very similar for both Kafka Connect and MirrorMaker, so we'll demonstrate how to do it with Kafka Connect and then explain how the process applies to MirrorMaker.

### Before we begin

If you want to follow along the steps in this blog post you need a Kubernetes cluster containing the Strimzi operator, a Kafka cluster, a Connect cluster, and a running connector.
First run through the Strimzi [quickstart guide](https://strimzi.io/quickstarts/) to deploy your Strimzi operator and Kafka cluster.

Once you have a Kafka cluster you can deploy Connect and a connector using the following commands:
1. `kubectl apply -f https://strimzi.io/examples/latest/connect/kafka-connect-build.yaml -n kafka`
2. `kubectl wait kafkaconnect/my-connect-cluster --for=condition=Ready --timeout=300s -n kafka`
3. `kubectl annotate kafkaconnect my-connect-cluster strimzi.io/use-connector-resources=true -n kafka`
4. `kubectl apply -f https://strimzi.io/examples/latest/connect/source-connector.yaml -n kafka`

> 5. `kubectl wait kafkaconnector/my-source-connector --for=condition=Ready --timeout=300s -n kafka`

Reviewer 5: Wondering if all or some of the steps would need a one line comment to explain what/why you are doing that step.

### Listing offsets

To list offsets, edit your `KafkaConnector` resource by running `kubectl edit kafkaconnector my-source-connector -n kafka` and add the configuration to specify where the offsets should be output:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
# ...
spec:
  #...
  listOffsets:
    toConfigMap:
      name: my-connector-offsets
  #...
```

This tells Strimzi to write the offsets to a ConfigMap called `my-connector-offsets`.

To trigger Strimzi to get the latest offsets, annotate your `KafkaConnector` resource:

```shell
$ kubectl annotate kafkaconnector my-source-connector strimzi.io/connector-offsets=list -n kafka
```

> After a couple of minutes you should have a new ConfigMap containing the output:

Reviewer 5: "After a couple of minutes" ... this is because of the reconciliation period, right? Would it make more sense to explicitly say that (and mentioning that the default is 2 minutes). So, something like "On the next periodic reconciliation, which is a couple of minutes by default, you should have a new ConfigMap containing the output".

Author: The operator should react to the annotation being added I think, I don't think it has to wait for the next reconciliation. I think I can change to "After a couple of seconds", I certainly seemed to find it did it pretty quickly. Or we even just say "Once you have annotated the resource, Strimzi creates a new ConfigMap containing the output:"?

Reviewer 5: > "Once you have annotated the resource, Strimzi creates a new ConfigMap containing the output:"?

Yeah, it's better imho.

```shell
$ kubectl get configmap my-connector-offsets -n kafka -oyaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2024-09-26T10:20:15Z"   (1)
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-connect-cluster
  name: my-connector-offsets
  namespace: kafka
  ownerReferences:    (2)
  - apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
    blockOwnerDeletion: false
    controller: false
    kind: KafkaConnector
    name: my-source-connector
    uid: 637e3be7-bd96-43ab-abde-c55b4c4550e0
  resourceVersion: "66951"
  uid: 641d60a9-36eb-4f29-9895-8f2c1eb9638e
data:   (3)
  offsets.json: |-
    {
      "offsets" : [ {
        "partition" : {
          "filename" : "/opt/kafka/LICENSE"
        },
        "offset" : {
          "position" : 15295
        }
      } ]
    }
```

1. If the ConfigMap doesn't already exist, Strimzi will create it automatically.

> 2. The owner reference points to your `KafkaConnector` resource. To provide a custom owner reference, create the ConfigMap in advance and set an owner reference manually.

Reviewer 5: "To provide a custom owner reference, create the ConfigMap in advance and set an owner reference manually.", what's the use case for someone doing this?

Author: If they don't want the ConfigMap to be cleaned up automatically when they delete the KafkaConnector resource

Reviewer 5: Good point. Maybe adding this "tip" to the line?

metadata:
  name: my-mirror-maker-2
spec:
  # ...
  mirrors:
  - # ...
    sourceConnector:
      listOffsets:
        toConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
      alterOffsets:
        fromConfigMap:
          name: my-connector-offsets
      state: stopped
    # ...
```

Strimzi allows you to list, alter and reset offsets for all the MirrorMaker connectors (`MirrorSourceConnector`, `MirrorCheckpointConnector`, `MirrorHeartbeatConnector`).
However, be aware that the only connector that currently actively uses its offsets is the `MirrorSourceConnector`.
Listing offsets can be useful for the `MirrorCheckpointConnector` and `MirrorHeartbeatConnector` to track progress.
However, altering or resetting offsets for these connectors is rarely necessary.

Strimzi only allows you to perform actions on one connector within a single mirror at a time.
Therefore, to initiate an action from a `KafkaMirrorMaker2` resource you must apply two annotations:
* `strimzi.io/connector-offsets`
* `strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector`

Set `strimzi.io/connector-offsets` to one of `list`, `alter` or `reset`.
At the same time set `strimzi.io/mirrormaker-connector` to the name of your connector.

> Strimzi names the connectors using the format `<SOURCE_ALIAS>-><TARGET_ALIAS>.<CONNECTOR_TYPE>`, for example `east-kafka->west-kafka.MirrorSourceConnector`.

Reviewer 5: Wondering if something like this:

`[SOURCE_ALIAS]->[TARGET_ALIAS].[CONNECTOR_TYPE]`

is more readable than this:

`<SOURCE_ALIAS>-><TARGET_ALIAS>.<CONNECTOR_TYPE>`

Because of the `->` between `>` and `<`.

Author: Good point
